docs/bundle-json-spec.md, before:

# Lyra Bundle JSON Format Specification

**Version:** 1.0.0  
**Format Version:** 1.x

This document describes the JSON format for Lyra bundles, enabling non-TypeScript consumers to understand, validate, and integrate with Lyra bundle files.

## Overview

A Lyra bundle is a self-contained JSON document containing:
- A **manifest** describing the dataset schema and capabilities
- An **items** array containing the actual data records
- A **facetIndex** containing precomputed posting lists for fast facet queries

Bundles are designed to be:
- **Self-describing**: The manifest fully describes the schema and query capabilities
- **Portable**: Can be loaded and queried in any environment that can parse JSON
- **Deterministic**: The same inputs always produce the same bundle structure

## Top-Level Structure

The root object has three required properties:

```json
{
  "manifest": { ... },
  "items": [ ... ],
  "facetIndex": { ... }
}
```

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| `manifest` | `LyraManifest` | Yes | Bundle manifest describing fields, types, and capabilities |
| `items` | `Array<Object>` | Yes | Array of data items (can be empty) |
| `facetIndex` | `FacetPostingLists` | Yes | Precomputed facet index for fast queries |

## Manifest Structure

The manifest (`LyraManifest`) describes the bundle schema and capabilities:

```json
{
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "datasetId": "tickets-2025-11-22",
  "builtAt": "2025-11-22T03:14:00Z",
  "fields": [ ... ],
  "capabilities": { ... }
}
```

### Manifest Properties

#### `version` (string, required)

The bundle format version. For v1 bundles, must start with `"1."` (e.g., `"1.0.0"`, `"1.1.0"`).

**Validation:** Must match pattern `^1\.`

#### `datasetId` (string, required)

Logical identifier for the dataset. Used for tracking and debugging.

#### `builtAt` (string, required)

ISO 8601 timestamp indicating when the bundle was created. Format: `YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.sssZ`

Example: `"2025-11-22T03:14:00.000Z"`

#### `fields` (array, required)

Array of field definitions describing each field in the dataset.

Each field object has:

```json
{
  "name": "status",
  "kind": "facet",
  "type": "string",
  "ops": ["eq", "in"]
}
```

**Field Object Properties:**

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| `name` | `string` | Yes | Field name (must be unique within fields array) |
| `kind` | `string` | Yes | Field kind: `"id"`, `"facet"`, `"range"`, or `"meta"` |
| `type` | `string` | Yes | Field type: `"string"`, `"number"`, `"boolean"`, or `"date"` |
| `ops` | `Array<string>` | Yes | Supported operations (descriptive metadata) |

**Field Kinds:**

- `"id"`: Identifier field; informational for manifest (not specially indexed in v1)
- `"facet"`: Indexed for equality and IN filters
- `"range"`: Used in numeric/date range filters
- `"meta"`: Schema awareness only, not indexed

**Field Types:**

- `"string"`: String values
- `"number"`: Numeric values
- `"boolean"`: Boolean values
- `"date"`: Date values.
  - If stored as numbers, they are interpreted as Unix timestamps in milliseconds.
  - If stored as strings, they are parsed with `Date.parse()` and compared as timestamps.
  - Items whose values cannot be parsed are effectively excluded from range results.

**Operations (`ops`):**

The `ops` array is descriptive metadata generated from the `kind`:
- Facet fields: `["eq", "in"]`
- Range fields: `["between", "gte", "lte"]`
- Other fields: `["eq"]`

Note: `ops` does not change query semantics in v1; it documents which operations are meaningful.

#### `capabilities` (object, required)

Describes which fields support which query types:

```json
{
  "facets": ["status", "priority", "customer"],
  "ranges": ["createdAt", "amount"]
}
```

**Capabilities Properties:**

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| `facets` | `Array<string>` | Yes | Field names that can be used in facet filters |
| `ranges` | `Array<string>` | Yes | Field names that can be used in range filters |

**Validation Rules:**

- All field names in `capabilities.facets` must exist in `fields` array
- All field names in `capabilities.ranges` must exist in `fields` array
- Facet fields must have `kind: "facet"` in their field definition
- Range fields must have `kind: "range"` in their field definition

## Items Structure

The `items` array contains the actual data records:

```json
[
  { "id": "T-1001", "status": "open", "priority": "high", "createdAt": "2025-11-20T10:15:00Z" },
  { "id": "T-1002", "status": "closed", "priority": "low", "createdAt": "2025-11-19T08:30:00Z" }
]
```

### Items Array Properties

- **Type:** Array of objects
- **Can be empty:** Yes (empty array is valid)
- **Item structure:** Objects can have any structure, but should match fields declared in manifest
- **Storage:** Items are stored as-is with no transformation

### Multi-Valued Facets

Facet fields may contain arrays of values:

```json
{
  "id": "T-1001",
  "tags": ["bug", "p0", "crash"],
  "status": "open"
}
```

Array values are treated as "matches if any value matches" in queries. See the main README for detailed query semantics.

### Null and Undefined Values

- `null` and `undefined` values in facet fields are excluded from the facet index
- `null` and `undefined` values in range fields cause items to be excluded from range filter results

## FacetIndex Structure

The `facetIndex` (`FacetPostingLists`) contains precomputed posting lists for fast facet queries:

```json
{
  "status": {
    "open": [0, 2, 5],
    "closed": [1, 3, 4]
  },
  "priority": {
    "high": [0, 5],
    "medium": [2],
    "low": [1, 3, 4]
  }
}
```

### FacetIndex Structure

- **Type:** Object
- **Keys:** Field names (must match `capabilities.facets`)
- **Values:** Objects mapping value strings to arrays of item indices

### Posting List Semantics

Each posting list is an array of item indices (numbers) that:
- Are **sorted ascending** (e.g., `[0, 2, 5]`, not `[5, 0, 2]`)
- Are **deduplicated** (no repeated indices)
- Reference valid item positions (`0 <= index < items.length`)

**Note:** Runtime query behavior (how these indices are used) is defined in the main README. This document only describes the format structure.

### Value Keys

- Facet values are converted to strings for indexing
- `"true"`, `"false"`, `"null"`, `"undefined"` are stored as string literals
- Numbers are converted to strings (e.g., `42` → `"42"`)
- Arrays are indexed per-element (each value gets its own posting list entries)

### Empty FacetIndex Entries

Empty objects are valid for facet fields:

```json
{
  "status": {},
  "priority": { ... }
}
```

This indicates the field exists but has no indexed values (e.g., all items have `null`/`undefined` for that field).

## Validation Rules

### Version Validation

- `manifest.version` must start with `"1."`
- Invalid version format should be rejected

### Manifest Validation

- All required properties must be present
- `fields` array must not be empty (at least one field required)
- Field names must be unique within `fields` array
- `capabilities.facets` must only reference fields with `kind: "facet"`
- `capabilities.ranges` must only reference fields with `kind: "range"`

### FacetIndex Validation

- All keys in `facetIndex` must be present in `capabilities.facets`
- All indices in posting lists must be valid (`0 <= index < items.length`)
- Posting lists must be sorted ascending (producers must guarantee this)
- Posting lists must be deduplicated (producers must guarantee this)

**Note:** Loaders may skip re-validation of sorting and deduplication for performance reasons, but producers are required to emit sorted, deduplicated posting lists.

### Cross-Reference Validation

- Field names referenced in `capabilities` must exist in `fields`
- FacetIndex keys must match `capabilities.facets`
- Item structure should align with declared fields (warnings only, not errors)

**Note:** Item structure validation is primarily a producer-side guideline. The reference JS/TS implementation emits warnings at build time if configured fields do not appear in any item, but loaders do not revalidate item structure.

## Complete Example

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "datasetId": "tickets-2025-11-22",
    "builtAt": "2025-11-22T03:14:00.000Z",
    "fields": [
      {
        "name": "id",
        "kind": "id",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq"]
      },
      {
        "name": "status",
        "kind": "facet",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq", "in"]
      },
      {
        "name": "priority",
        "kind": "facet",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq", "in"]
      },
      {
        "name": "tags",
        "kind": "facet",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq", "in"]
      },
      {
        "name": "createdAt",
        "kind": "range",
        "type": "date",
        "ops": ["between", "gte", "lte"]
      },
      {
        "name": "amount",
        "kind": "range",
        "type": "number",
        "ops": ["between", "gte", "lte"]
      }
    ],
    "capabilities": {
      "facets": ["status", "priority", "tags"],
      "ranges": ["createdAt", "amount"]
    }
  },
  "items": [
    {
      "id": "T-1001",
      "status": "open",
      "priority": "high",
      "tags": ["bug", "p0"],
      "createdAt": "2025-11-20T10:15:00Z",
      "amount": 1500
    },
    {
      "id": "T-1002",
      "status": "closed",
      "priority": "low",
      "tags": ["feature"],
      "createdAt": "2025-11-19T08:30:00Z",
      "amount": 500
    },
    {
      "id": "T-1003",
      "status": "open",
      "priority": "medium",
      "tags": ["bug", "p1"],
      "createdAt": "2025-11-21T14:20:00Z",
      "amount": 2000
    }
  ],
  "facetIndex": {
    "status": {
      "open": [0, 2],
      "closed": [1]
    },
    "priority": {
      "high": [0],
      "medium": [2],
      "low": [1]
    },
    "tags": {
      "bug": [0, 2],
      "p0": [0],
      "feature": [1],
      "p1": [2]
    }
  }
}
```

## Error Cases

### Invalid Version

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "version": "2.0.0",  // ❌ Must start with "1."
    ...
  }
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle version: "2.0.0". Expected version starting with "1."`

### Missing Required Properties

**Missing manifest or items:**

```json
{
  "manifest": { ... }
  // ❌ Missing "items"
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle JSON: missing manifest or items`

**Note:** `facetIndex` is technically required but the reference implementation initializes it to `{}` if missing. Producers should always include `facetIndex`, even if empty.

### Invalid Capability Reference

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "fields": [
      { "name": "status", "kind": "facet", "type": "string", "ops": ["eq", "in"] }
    ],
    "capabilities": {
      "facets": ["status", "nonexistent"]  // ❌ "nonexistent" not in fields
    }
  }
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle: capability references non-existent facet field "nonexistent"`

### Invalid FacetIndex Key

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "capabilities": {
      "facets": ["status"]
    }
  },
  "facetIndex": {
    "status": { ... },
    "invalidField": { ... }  // ❌ Not in capabilities.facets
  }
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle: facetIndex contains field "invalidField" that is not in capabilities.facets`

### Invalid Posting List Index

```json
{
  "items": [
    { "status": "open" },
    { "status": "closed" }
  ],
  "facetIndex": {
    "status": {
      "open": [0, 5]  // ❌ Index 5 is out of bounds (only 2 items)
    }
  }
}
```

**Note:** All posting list indices must be within `[0, items.length)`. Loaders may choose to skip this check for performance reasons, but producers are required to emit in-bounds indices.

## Version Compatibility

### Version 1.x

- All bundles with `version` starting with `"1."` are compatible
- Format is stable within v1
- Future versions (2.x, etc.) may introduce breaking changes

### Migration Notes

- When v2 is introduced, v1 bundles will continue to be supported
- Loaders should validate version and reject unsupported formats
- Version format: `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH` (semantic versioning)

## Implementation Notes

### Loading a Bundle

1. Parse JSON
2. Validate `manifest.version` starts with `"1."`
3. Validate all required properties exist (`manifest`, `items`; `facetIndex` may be missing and will be initialized to `{}`)
4. Validate `manifest.fields` is not empty
5. Validate `capabilities` references match `fields`
6. Validate `facetIndex` keys match `capabilities.facets`
7. Optionally validate posting list indices are in bounds (recommended but not required)
8. Loaders may skip re-validation of posting list sorting and deduplication for performance; producers must guarantee these invariants

### Query Semantics

The bundle format does not define query semantics; see the main README for query behavior. The format only describes the data structure.

### Performance Considerations

- Posting lists are pre-sorted and deduplicated for efficient intersection
- Large bundles may benefit from compression (gzip, etc.)
- Consider lazy-loading items if only querying (not returning full items)

## References

- [Main README](../README.md) - High-level overview and API documentation
- [TypeScript Types](../src/types.ts) - TypeScript type definitions (for reference)

Commit message:

Update README and bundle JSON specification to clarify the role of the `capabilities` object as the authoritative source for queryable fields. Enhance agent tool integration examples with improved documentation and usage notes. Add new query behavior details to ensure accurate filtering based on capabilities. Update examples to reflect local development practices.

docs/bundle-json-spec.md, after:

# Lyra Bundle JSON Format Specification

**Version:** 1.0.0  
**Format Version:** 1.x

This document describes the JSON format for Lyra bundles, enabling non-TypeScript consumers to understand, validate, and integrate with Lyra bundle files.

## Overview

A Lyra bundle is a self-contained JSON document containing:
- A **manifest** describing the dataset schema and capabilities
- An **items** array containing the actual data records
- A **facetIndex** containing precomputed posting lists for fast facet queries

Bundles are designed to be:
- **Self-describing**: The manifest fully describes the schema and query capabilities
- **Portable**: Can be loaded and queried in any environment that can parse JSON
- **Deterministic**: The same inputs always produce the same bundle structure

## Top-Level Structure

The root object has three required properties:

```json
{
  "manifest": { ... },
  "items": [ ... ],
  "facetIndex": { ... }
}
```

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| `manifest` | `LyraManifest` | Yes | Bundle manifest describing fields, types, and capabilities |
| `items` | `Array<Object>` | Yes | Array of data items (can be empty) |
| `facetIndex` | `FacetPostingLists` | Yes | Precomputed facet index for fast queries |

## Manifest Structure

The manifest (`LyraManifest`) describes the bundle schema and capabilities:

```json
{
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "datasetId": "tickets-2025-11-22",
  "builtAt": "2025-11-22T03:14:00Z",
  "fields": [ ... ],
  "capabilities": { ... }
}
```

### Manifest Properties

#### `version` (string, required)

The bundle format version. For v1 bundles, must start with `"1."` (e.g., `"1.0.0"`, `"1.1.0"`).

**Validation:** Must match pattern `^1\.`

#### `datasetId` (string, required)

Logical identifier for the dataset. Used for tracking and debugging.

#### `builtAt` (string, required)

ISO 8601 timestamp indicating when the bundle was created. Format: `YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.sssZ`

Example: `"2025-11-22T03:14:00.000Z"`

#### `fields` (array, required)

Array of field definitions describing each field in the dataset.

Each field object has:

```json
{
  "name": "status",
  "kind": "facet",
  "type": "string",
  "ops": ["eq", "in"]
}
```

**Field Object Properties:**

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| `name` | `string` | Yes | Field name (must be unique within fields array) |
| `kind` | `string` | Yes | Field kind: `"id"`, `"facet"`, `"range"`, or `"meta"` |
| `type` | `string` | Yes | Field type: `"string"`, `"number"`, `"boolean"`, or `"date"` |
| `ops` | `Array<string>` | Yes | Supported operations (descriptive metadata) |

**Field Kinds:**

- `"id"`: Identifier field; informational for manifest (not specially indexed in v1)
- `"facet"`: Indexed for equality and IN filters
- `"range"`: Used in numeric/date range filters
- `"meta"`: Schema awareness only, not indexed

**Field Types:**

- `"string"`: String values
- `"number"`: Numeric values
- `"boolean"`: Boolean values
- `"date"`: Date values.
  - If stored as numbers, they are interpreted as Unix timestamps in milliseconds.
  - If stored as strings, they are parsed with `Date.parse()` and compared as timestamps.
  - Items whose values cannot be parsed are effectively excluded from range results.

**Operations (`ops`):**

The `ops` array is descriptive metadata generated from the `kind`:
- Facet fields: `["eq", "in"]`
- Range fields: `["between", "gte", "lte"]`
- Other fields: `["eq"]`

Note: `ops` does not change query semantics in v1; it documents which operations are meaningful.

#### `capabilities` (object, required)

Describes which fields support which query types. **The `capabilities` object is the authoritative source of truth for queryable fields.** Only fields listed in `capabilities.facets` can be used in facet filters, and only fields listed in `capabilities.ranges` can be used in range filters.

```json
{
  "facets": ["status", "priority", "customer"],
  "ranges": ["createdAt", "amount"]
}
```

**Capabilities Properties:**

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| `facets` | `Array<string>` | Yes | Field names that can be used in facet filters (source of truth) |
| `ranges` | `Array<string>` | Yes | Field names that can be used in range filters (source of truth) |

**Validation Rules:**

- All field names in `capabilities.facets` must exist in `fields` array
- All field names in `capabilities.ranges` must exist in `fields` array
- Facet fields must have `kind: "facet"` in their field definition
- Range fields must have `kind: "range"` in their field definition

**Query Behavior:**

- Runtime queries only accept facet/range field names that appear in `capabilities.facets` and `capabilities.ranges`
- Schema helpers (like `buildQuerySchema`) derive their schemas from `capabilities`, not from `fields` directly
- Unknown facet or range fields in queries are treated as "no matches" (returns empty results)

## Items Structure

The `items` array contains the actual data records:

```json
[
  { "id": "T-1001", "status": "open", "priority": "high", "createdAt": "2025-11-20T10:15:00Z" },
  { "id": "T-1002", "status": "closed", "priority": "low", "createdAt": "2025-11-19T08:30:00Z" }
]
```

### Items Array Properties

- **Type:** Array of objects
- **Can be empty:** Yes (empty array is valid)
- **Item structure:** Objects can have any structure, but should match fields declared in manifest
- **Storage:** Items are stored as-is with no transformation

### Multi-Valued Facets

Facet fields may contain arrays of values:

```json
{
  "id": "T-1001",
  "tags": ["bug", "p0", "crash"],
  "status": "open"
}
```

Array values are treated as "matches if any value matches" in queries. See the "Query and result" section in the [main README](../README.md#query-and-result) for detailed query semantics.

### Null and Undefined Values

- `null` and `undefined` values in facet fields are excluded from the facet index
- `null` and `undefined` values in range fields cause items to be excluded from range filter results

## FacetIndex Structure

The `facetIndex` (`FacetPostingLists`) contains precomputed posting lists for fast facet queries:

```json
{
  "status": {
    "open": [0, 2, 5],
    "closed": [1, 3, 4]
  },
  "priority": {
    "high": [0, 5],
    "medium": [2],
    "low": [1, 3, 4]
  }
}
```

### FacetIndex Structure

- **Type:** Object
- **Keys:** Field names (must match `capabilities.facets`)
- **Values:** Objects mapping value strings to arrays of item indices

### Posting List Semantics

Each posting list is an array of item indices (numbers) that:
- Are **sorted ascending** (e.g., `[0, 2, 5]`, not `[5, 0, 2]`)
- Are **deduplicated** (no repeated indices)
- Reference valid item positions (`0 <= index < items.length`)

**Note:** Runtime query behavior (how these indices are used) is defined in the main README. This document only describes the format structure.

### Value Keys

- Facet values are converted to strings for indexing
- `"true"`, `"false"`, `"null"`, `"undefined"` are stored as string literals
- Numbers are converted to strings (e.g., `42` → `"42"`)
- Arrays are indexed per-element (each value gets its own posting list entries)

### Empty FacetIndex Entries

Empty objects are valid for facet fields:

```json
{
  "status": {},
  "priority": { ... }
}
```

This indicates the field exists but has no indexed values (e.g., all items have `null`/`undefined` for that field).

## Validation Rules

### Version Validation

- `manifest.version` must start with `"1."`
- Invalid version format should be rejected

### Manifest Validation

- All required properties must be present
- `fields` array must not be empty (at least one field required)
- Field names must be unique within `fields` array
- `capabilities.facets` must only reference fields with `kind: "facet"`
- `capabilities.ranges` must only reference fields with `kind: "range"`

### FacetIndex Validation

- All keys in `facetIndex` must be present in `capabilities.facets`
- All indices in posting lists must be valid (`0 <= index < items.length`)
- Posting lists must be sorted ascending (producers must guarantee this)
- Posting lists must be deduplicated (producers must guarantee this)

**Note:** Loaders may skip re-validation of sorting and deduplication for performance reasons, but producers are required to emit sorted, deduplicated posting lists.

### Cross-Reference Validation

- Field names referenced in `capabilities` must exist in `fields`
- FacetIndex keys must match `capabilities.facets`
- Item structure should align with declared fields (warnings only, not errors)

**Note:** Item structure validation is primarily a producer-side guideline. The reference JS/TS implementation emits warnings at build time if configured fields do not appear in any item, but loaders do not revalidate item structure.

## Complete Example

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "datasetId": "tickets-2025-11-22",
    "builtAt": "2025-11-22T03:14:00.000Z",
    "fields": [
      {
        "name": "id",
        "kind": "id",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq"]
      },
      {
        "name": "status",
        "kind": "facet",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq", "in"]
      },
      {
        "name": "priority",
        "kind": "facet",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq", "in"]
      },
      {
        "name": "tags",
        "kind": "facet",
        "type": "string",
        "ops": ["eq", "in"]
      },
      {
        "name": "createdAt",
        "kind": "range",
        "type": "date",
        "ops": ["between", "gte", "lte"]
      },
      {
        "name": "amount",
        "kind": "range",
        "type": "number",
        "ops": ["between", "gte", "lte"]
      }
    ],
    "capabilities": {
      "facets": ["status", "priority", "tags"],
      "ranges": ["createdAt", "amount"]
    }
  },
  "items": [
    {
      "id": "T-1001",
      "status": "open",
      "priority": "high",
      "tags": ["bug", "p0"],
      "createdAt": "2025-11-20T10:15:00Z",
      "amount": 1500
    },
    {
      "id": "T-1002",
      "status": "closed",
      "priority": "low",
      "tags": ["feature"],
      "createdAt": "2025-11-19T08:30:00Z",
      "amount": 500
    },
    {
      "id": "T-1003",
      "status": "open",
      "priority": "medium",
      "tags": ["bug", "p1"],
      "createdAt": "2025-11-21T14:20:00Z",
      "amount": 2000
    }
  ],
  "facetIndex": {
    "status": {
      "open": [0, 2],
      "closed": [1]
    },
    "priority": {
      "high": [0],
      "medium": [2],
      "low": [1]
    },
    "tags": {
      "bug": [0, 2],
      "p0": [0],
      "feature": [1],
      "p1": [2]
    }
  }
}
```

## Error Cases

### Invalid Version

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "version": "2.0.0",  // ❌ Must start with "1."
    ...
  }
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle version: "2.0.0". Expected version starting with "1."`

### Missing Required Properties

**Missing manifest or items:**

```json
{
  "manifest": { ... }
  // ❌ Missing "items"
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle JSON: missing manifest or items`

**Note:** `facetIndex` is technically required but the reference implementation initializes it to `{}` if missing. Producers should always include `facetIndex`, even if empty.

### Invalid Capability Reference

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "fields": [
      { "name": "status", "kind": "facet", "type": "string", "ops": ["eq", "in"] }
    ],
    "capabilities": {
      "facets": ["status", "nonexistent"]  // ❌ "nonexistent" not in fields
    }
  }
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle: capability references non-existent facet field "nonexistent"`

### Invalid FacetIndex Key

```json
{
  "manifest": {
    "capabilities": {
      "facets": ["status"]
    }
  },
  "facetIndex": {
    "status": { ... },
    "invalidField": { ... }  // ❌ Not in capabilities.facets
  }
}
```

**Error:** `Invalid bundle: facetIndex contains field "invalidField" that is not in capabilities.facets`

### Invalid Posting List Index

```json
{
  "items": [
    { "status": "open" },
    { "status": "closed" }
  ],
  "facetIndex": {
    "status": {
      "open": [0, 5]  // ❌ Index 5 is out of bounds (only 2 items)
    }
  }
}
```

**Note:** All posting list indices must be within `[0, items.length)`. Loaders may choose to skip this check for performance reasons, but producers are required to emit in-bounds indices.

## Version Compatibility

### Version 1.x

- All bundles with `version` starting with `"1."` are compatible
- Format is stable within v1
- Future versions (2.x, etc.) may introduce breaking changes

### Migration Notes

- When v2 is introduced, v1 bundles will continue to be supported
- Loaders should validate version and reject unsupported formats
- Version format: `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH` (semantic versioning)

## Implementation Notes

### Loading a Bundle

1. Parse JSON
2. Validate `manifest.version` starts with `"1."`
3. Validate all required properties exist (`manifest`, `items`; `facetIndex` may be missing and will be initialized to `{}`)
4. Validate `manifest.fields` is not empty
5. Validate `capabilities` references match `fields`
6. Validate `facetIndex` keys match `capabilities.facets`
7. Optionally validate posting list indices are in bounds (recommended but not required)
8. Loaders may skip re-validation of posting list sorting and deduplication for performance; producers must guarantee these invariants

### Query Semantics

The bundle format does not define query semantics; see the main README for query behavior. The format only describes the data structure.

### Performance Considerations

- Posting lists are pre-sorted and deduplicated for efficient intersection
- Large bundles may benefit from compression (gzip, etc.)
- Consider lazy-loading items if only querying (not returning full items)

## References

- [Main README](../README.md) - High-level overview and API documentation
- [TypeScript Types](../src/types.ts) - TypeScript type definitions (for reference)
